How far east did the Romans go? There
are many tantalizing clues. These
include an ancient map showing a temple
of Augustus in India, an imperial
prophecy proclaiming future dominion
over Sri Lanka,
Roman coin hordes as far away as
Vietnam,
and Chinese sources claiming to have
received shipborn embassies from Dachin
in the southern seas.
Clearly, there is much more to the story
of Romans in the Far East than is
understood by the general public.
Today, we'll seek to shed light on this
topic by following the stepping stones
of Roman expansion across the far side
of the world. From the maritime route of
the Atharran Sea to the coastal ports of
southern India, the shipwreck shores of
Sri Lanka and beyond.
This is the story of Romans in the Far
East.
So, for a while now, I've had my eyes on
this glorious tome. It's called The
Book: The Ultimate Guide for Rebuilding
Civilization. And I was absolutely
delighted when they reached out to
sponsor today's video. So, what is the
book? Well, it's an over 400page
masterpiece celebrating the great
discoveries and inventions of history,
which have all been brought to life with
incredible handdrawn illustrations.
Here, the team at Hungry Minds has
delivered a fantastic experience that
starts right when you get the book.
There's artistry and charm oozing out of
every facet of the experience. Flipping
through the book will take you through
the topics of plants, animals, food,
building, materials, tools, art, music,
games, society, and more. I honestly
can't emphasize enough just how sucked
into this book you'll be. I was flipping
through the pages getting stuck just
looking at the visuals and the graphics
of this to the point that I forgot that
there was actually text on the page. And
that's coming from someone who reads
every little panel that I come upon in
the museum. So, this was an enthralling
read. And this is just one page of
hundreds. I mean, take a look at this
material here. This is incredible. So,
honestly, I can't recommend the book
enough. It makes for great reading
material for yourself or a loved one and
can easily double as decoration on your
bookshelf or coffee table. If you order
the book for yourself, you'll also be
privy to a secret envelope with the
extra pages of censored materials
inside. So, in a world taken over by
cheap disposable items and AI slop,
these are the types of products that we
need more of in our lives. So, please
support the channel and the creative
team behind the book by clicking the
link in the description or by scanning
the QR code on screen. And be sure to
use the promo code Invicta for an extra
10% off. Enjoy.
Prior to the rise of Rome, East West
relations had been a long time in the
making. This earliest consciousness had
begun in the 6th to 4th centuries BC
when the Aminids had served as the
terrestrial bridge between worlds. From
them, the Greeks learned of what lay at
the ends of the earth. It was this
mystery which eventually enticed
Alexander the Great to direct his
conquest across the Indis in the 320s
BC. In his footsteps followed the
successor kingdoms which attempted to
stitch together east and west in their
bid for supremacy.
During this period, many diplomatic and
commercial embassies were exchanged
between Indian and Greek rulers,
ushering in a new period of inquiry
between the two worlds.
Eventually, as Rome wrestled its way to
controlling the Mediterranean basin, it
would be the inheritor of these
relations. Chief among them would be the
acquisition of Egypt in 30 BC, which
under the Talmies had already begun to
pioneer an alternate route to India
through the Red Sea and beyond.
Thus, it was through this route that the
Indians became aware of Rome and sent
out a first wave of embassies to meet
with Emperor Augustus.
Their exchange is recorded by Cases Dau
who paints a fascinating picture of
first contact. Shortly thereafter, it
would be Rome which began to turn its
eye to the far east.
As Rome now sought to reach out, it will
be relevant to first get ourselves
caught up with the goings on in India.
Here we can rewind the clock to begin
around the 3rd century BC with the
Marian Empire. This was the first true
superpower of the subcontinent.
Rising from the disruptive wake of
Alexander the Great's incursions,
Chundraup de Maria had toppled the
preceding Nanda Empire to found a new
dynasty that would extend its tendrils
far beyond the Heartland regent of Maga.
The Marian Empire's reach put it in
contact with the Hellenic successor
kingdoms. In particular, they would
clash with the Salucid militarily before
settling their scores with diplomatic
and marriage arrangements. Much of what
the Greeks knew of India came from this
period of exchange when ambassadors such
as mastines were sent to spend time in
the eastern court of Patripra.
In this time, the early Marian rulers
presided over a period of economic
prosperity driven by extensive
infrastructure projects, generous public
works, currency standardization, law
reforms, and administrative
centralization.
Many of these initiatives were
championed by the third emperor, Ashoka,
who ruled from 268 to 232 BC. His reign
is remembered as the imperial zenith of
the Marians with bold diplomatic and
military maneuvers that subdued most of
the Indian subcontinent.
Yet, even when discerning historians
point out that the Empire's vast
territory is better conceptualized as a
network of distant power centers
connected by long routes through wild
autonomous regions, it nonetheless stood
as an impressive juggernaut of its age.
However, the following Marian rulers
proved far less capable than their
predecessors.
The empire soon fell into decline and
irrelevance. What followed would be a
period of 500 years of murky history,
sometimes referred to as the dark age of
India. It was in this period that many
local rulers quarreled for supremacy
while successive waves of invaders
poured over the northern borders.
Yet, as is often the case with
historical narratives, the term dark
ages is overly simplistic and we should
understand that in this time there were
still many cultural, artistic,
scientific and commercial areas of
advancement.
This was especially true in southern
India which had never been conquered by
the Marians. Here the Dravidian speaking
peoples were undergoing a dramatic shift
from upland pastoralism and subsistance
farming to lowland white rice
cultivation which yielded massive
agricultural surpluses. This in turn
ushered in a rapid era of urbanization
and state formation that had previously
swept through the north some centuries
earlier. Chief among the new powers of
this Tamil land would be the Cholas,
Cheras, and Pandas.
But the rise of the south proved
different in nature to that of the
north. Hemmed in by the confines of
their peninsula, their expansion lay now
at sea. To this end, maritime activities
blossomed with fleets of explorers,
merchants, and mariners reaching out in
all directions to establish lucrative
trade routes, bustling ports, and
important diplomatic contacts. This
dakanapata or southern route linking
India to the rest of the world would be
the gateway through which Rome would now
enter the affairs of the far east.
But exactly where and when the first
Romans set foot in India is unclear.
What is clear is that they were not the
first westerners to do so. Throughout
the first and second centuries BC, Greek
and Egyptian traders had increasingly
been shuttling back and forth across the
seas in their attempts to reach the
distant lands, often dealing with
intermediaries along the Arabian and
African coast. Eventually, the Western
sailors learned to make use of the
seasonal monsoons to make the full
journey themselves. As Rome took charge
of Egypt in the late 1st century BC, the
most enterprising among them must have
joined in on the burgeoning trade route.
Unfortunately, such adventures go
unrecorded in our history.
The best glimpse we get at what this
voyage may have looked like comes to us
from an ancient Greek sea captain who
wrote the paraplus of the ariththran sea
around the mid 1st century AD. In it, he
provides an extensive catalog of the
roots and stops to be made in the
journey from Egypt to India. It's an
engrossing read to be sure, but for the
sake of time, we'll now just cover
select excerpts which cover the latter
half of the outbound journey. Starting
from the far side of Arabia, quote,
"Sailing along the coast, which trends
northward towards the entrance of the
Persian Sea, one first finds after 2,000
stadia many islands known as Kozy
extending along the shore. The
inhabitants are a treacherous lot, very
little civilized.
Sailing through the mouth of the Gulf
after 6 days course, there is another
market town of Persia called Omana.
Beyond this region, the continent makes
a wide curve from the east across the
depths of the bays and from there
follows the coastal district of Skyia.
From the marshy north flows down the
river Cynthis. It is the greatest of all
the rivers of the Arythan Sea, bringing
down an enormous volume of water, so
that even a long way out at sea, the
water of the ocean is fresh from it.
Here the Greek captain appears to be
describing the mouth of the Indis River.
To many at the time this would have
represented the ends of the earth which
Alexander had visited in his great
campaigns. Indeed the paraplus actually
reports quote in these places there
remains even to the present times signs
of the expedition of Alexander such as
ancient shrines walls of forts and great
wells.
The captain goes on to describe the
journey around the coast of modern
Bangalore which was of tricky anchorage
but dotted with many fishing towns.
Beyond one arrives at quote, "a fertile
country yielding cotton, wheat, rice,
sesame oil, and clarified butter. Very
many cattle are pastured there, and the
men are of great stature and black in
color." Here, the author warns first-
timers and inexperienced captains to
beware of the mighty tides, which turn
land to sea and sea to land. These are
worse at the new moon. Quote, "For there
is so great force in the rush of the
sea, especially during the flood tide at
night, that if you're at the entrance,
at the moment when the waters are still,
on the instant there is born to you at
the mouth of the river, a noise like the
cries of an army heard from afar. And
very soon, the sea itself comes rushing
in over the shores with a great roar.
But from these dangers, one could
apparently be saved by men in the local
king service who help pilot vessels
along the coast, steering them around
shors and towing them to safe
anchorages.
Next in the journey, quote, "The
adjoining coast extends in a straight
line from north to south." And so this
region is called Dakinabades, for
Dakenos in the language of the natives
means south. The inland country back
from the coast toward the east comprises
many desert regions and great mountains
and all kinds of wild beasts. Leopards,
tigers, elephants, enormous serpents,
hyenas, and baboons of many sorts and
many populous nations as far as the
Ganges. The Perlus then lists a sequence
of market towns which stretch out along
the coast. quote Supara and the city of
Kalenna, then Simila, Mandagora,
Palapatma, Melisagura, Bzantium, Tyram,
and Aranabos.
Then the islands of Cesrine, Agiddi, and
Kineti, where there are pirates, and
after this the White Island, then Kamara
and Tindis, the first markets of Deira,
and then Muzirus and Ilkinda, which are
now of leading importance.
The captain continues to describe the
coasts of India wrapping around the
south and up to the Ganges and the
region of Bangladesh. The parable then
ends as follows. Quote, "The regions
beyond these places are either difficult
to access because of their excessive
winters and great cold or else cannot be
sought out because of some divine
influence of the gods."
Reading such a work, one walks away
truly impressed by the farraveling
adventures of ancient sailors. But now
we might wonder what was it actually
like to step ashore at one of these
distant ports.
Unfortunately, no firstirhand Roman
accounts describe the experience. But
for this we can turn to Indian records.
One source is the rich history of Tamil
poetry which preserves records of daily
life in the south of India. Through it
we learn of the port of Caviru Parinam
in the Chola Kingdom. The poem describes
it as a busy city set upon the northern
bank of a broad deep stream. Here,
heavily laden ships sailed in from the
sea without slackening their sails.
Along the way, they were guided by brick
and mortar towers with flashing lights.
The ships were docked at raised
platforms along a beach, which teamed
with fragrant trees and flowers. Here,
fierce tax collectors stood guard at
nearby warehouses, collecting duties and
stamping goods with the symbol of the
royal tiger.
Just inland came the city of Cavary
Padinam itself. Reportedly of great fame
and prosperity, it boasted the
protection of celestial beings and bore
many proud flags. Within its walls, tall
colorful mansions reached to the skies.
From their porches came the singing of
women of delicate looks with bright
brows and fine jewels. Many tended to
their gardens while children with gold
anklets rolled around them in toy
chariots. Wealth was everywhere to
behold in a city where thieving chickens
were apparently the worst of their
concerns. The poor too enjoyed the
spoils of trade thanks to the
establishment of public kitchens. So
prolific were their cooks that thick
starch drained from rice ran down the
streets like rivers. As they did so,
they passed many monasteries, ritual
grounds, plazas, stables, gardens, and
groves. In the fields around town could
be found lakes in which bthers enjoyed
pleasures in this world and the next.
Meanwhile, strong warriors sparred in
the training fields, feasting on roasted
shrimp and boiled tortoises between
bouts. Children swam in the nearby
ocean, playing with crabs and making
sand dolls on the shores. It was said
that no matter what the people of
Kavadnam were engaged in, they enjoyed
it with all their senses and with no
baitment in their passions.
Such were the incredible sights to
behold. Given the strong impression the
city had on its neighbors, it should be
no surprise that foreigners were taken
in by this strange and intoxicating
place. And if the experience alone
wasn't enough to excite them, then
certainly the abundance of wealth would
have. To this end, Tamil accounts
actually speak of foreign traders having
set down roots around Kavirnam. Amidst
their quarters could be found crowds
hailing from Greece, Persia, Bactria,
Burma, Myanmar, and across the lands and
seas. They traded precious cargo of many
kinds. Specific mention is made of swift
horses, black pepper, gold, precious
stones, sandalwood, pearls, corals, and
many rare things piled up in such
quantities along the wide streets that
they bent the land beneath them.
Thus, the first Romans to arrive would
have found themselves joining in on the
ongoing party of commercial activity
which had already been established.
But while Romans might have been a small
minority at first, they quickly scaled
up their presence in India. Based on
both historical accounts and
archaeological records, there seems to
have been a wave of Roman goods and
people which swept across many of
India's southwestern coastal ports. The
extent of this activity is well
visualized by a map of Roman coin hordes
found across the region.
One favorite location was apparently the
city of Mirus in the Cheroke Kingdom. In
his natural history, Ply the Elder
states that Mirus was the nearest of the
Indian markets which could be reached
from the Red Sea in 40 days if one rode
the southwest monsoon.
writing in the late 1st century AD. His
description here reflects an evolution
in Roman navigation which now cut
directly across the Indian Ocean rather
than laboriously circling its coast as
described in the Perlus of the Arthuran
Sea. But what was Mirus like? The
emporium itself was located inland some
20 stadia up river with large ships
having to dock in a lagoon before having
their cargos fed upstream by smaller
vessels. Upon arrival, one encountered a
bustling town which the Pura Nura poem
describes as follows. Quote, "With its
streets, its houses, its covered fishing
boats where they sell fish, where they
pile up rice, with the shifting and
mingling crowd of a boisterous
riverbank, where the sacks of pepper are
heaped up with its gold deliveries
carried by the oceangoing ships and
brought to the riverbank by local boats.
The city of the gold-colored Kotivan,
the city that bestows wealth to its
visitors indiscriminately, and the
merchants of the mountains and the
merchants of the sea, the city where
liquor abounds. Yes, this Mirus, where
the rumbling ocean roars, is given to me
like a marvel, a treasure.
Here we can imagine that a foreign
district had already been established,
to which the Romans now added
themselves. Apparently, their presence
grew so pronounced that a map dating to
the late 2nd century AD shows the temple
of Augustus as being located near Mirus.
But what exactly this represents is
unclear. Was it a small shrine, a large
temple, or colony? We unfortunately
don't know. One leading idea is that
given the seasonality of the monsoons,
Western traders would have been stranded
in India for long stretches of time
before they could return home. Thus, it
makes sense for them to have established
a comfy base camp. Some authors even
point to the records of grain, garam,
and olive oil shipments to the region as
being evidence of demand from such
westerners abroad who wanted a break
from the diet of the locals. But even if
some wished to spend their time between
journeys cooped up in the relative
comfort of the foreign quarters, there
would have been many who took to the
wider world. Presumably, Roman merchants
would have wished to strike up relations
with the locals, discussing with
counterparts, local officials, and
perhaps even kings. But merchants were
not the only sorts of people drawn to
India. Alongside them came other hangers
on, such as diplomats, philosophers, and
religious figures. Most famously,
Christian tradition maintains that the
Apostle Thomas led several missions
across India in the late 1st century AD,
where he founded churches and made
converts. In this time he was apparently
threatened by attack and eventually
killed in 72 AD. Such dangers were not
uncommon. Western sources made frequent
mention of piracy across the area and of
destabilizations from war. Muzzirus, for
instance, was apparently besieged at one
point and taken by a Pia prince, leading
foreign traders to seek safer harbors
elsewhere.
Yet despite these disruptions, the
Romans would continue coming to India
thanks to the boom in commerce which
flourished across the first and second
centuries.
To get a sense of this, we can describe
the types of goods being traded, their
monetary value, and the wider impacts on
the economy. Once more, the paraplus
gives a great accounting of trade goods.
In Mirarus alone, commodities for export
included spices, semi-precious stones,
pearls, diamonds, sapphires, ivory,
Chinese silk, spikenard, and tortoise
shells. In exchange, the Romans imported
wine, paridos, figured linens,
multicolored textiles, antimony, copper,
tin, lead, coral, raw glass, railar,
[music] orpamment, and huge quantities
of gold coins.
Given all this, one might wonder how
much might a single trade voyage make.
We actually have some hard facts on the
matter in the form of the surviving
Mirus Papyrus. In it, we find a detailed
loan contract for financing the voyage
of a ship known as the Hermapolon and an
assessment of its cargo.
Typical merchant vessels might carry
anywhere from 100 to 200 tons of goods.
In this case, the hermapolone was on the
smaller end of the scale, but
nonetheless carried a great wealth of
pepper, ivory, aromatic nard,
malabathon, textiles, and other
unidentified goods. The papyrus then
lists the expected sale price for these
goods. Historians running the numbers
have estimated the total value of the
cargo at roughly 7 million dramas. This
would apparently have been enough to
purchase 2500 acres of the finest
farmland in Egypt or to pay the annual
salary of 9,000 soldiers.
Given that Strao claims over 100 ships
set sail for India every year in the 1st
century BC, we can truly appreciate just
how much money was being generated. With
very rough napkin math, 100 times the
contents of the Hermapolon would be able
to pay the annual salary of nearly 1
million soldiers, double the size of the
Roman army at its peak. And that's even
before this gold rush of Indian trade
accelerated in the first and second
centuries AD. As a result, we must
imagine the many individuals would have
gotten rich over this enterprise.
Unsurprisingly, the Roman government got
in on the action, too, with a 25% import
duty being imposed at the borders.
This tax ended up being one of the major
reasons why Egypt became such a money
printing machine for the empire.
But there were also downsides to all
this trade. Moralists of the time were
quick to bemoan the foreign influence
and the turning of the populace towards
imported luxuries.
Others such as Plenny meanwhile couched
the trade imbalance as a more dire
economic threat stating quote the
subject is well worthy of our notice
seeing that in no year does India drain
our empire of less than 550 millions of
cyerses giving back her own wares in
exchange which are sold among us at
fully 100 times their cost price.
In reaction to this apparently some
Romans began to seriously consider how
to make Indians more interested in the
purchase of Western goods.
The heavy hand of the emperor even got
involved with Vespasian of the late 1st
century AD enacting a ban on trade with
India. But with so much money on the
line, smuggling routes quickly
proliferated or bribes to officials
simply became part of the cost of doing
business. For now, the trade boom
continued unimpeded.
The more Romans came to India, the more
they pushed further east, presumably
working their way up the supply chain to
get a better cut of the profits. It is
this drive which led them around the
Cape of India towards its other side.
Along the way, they would run into the
island of Taprobane or modern Sri Lanka.
At the time, this land was seen as the
end of the earth. For instance, Avid in
his exile to the Black Sea town of
Thomas bemoans being sent so far away.
What was next? He said to have his
writings relegated to distant Taprobane
or the stars which lay beyond.
Through other authors we see how Sri
Lanka was often believed to be part of
an entirely different world which
existed beyond the natural order. Here
shadows disappeared at noon and fell to
the south during the day while at night
the sky revealed a new expanse of the
heavens.
Though the counterlanders who lived
there may have been strange in many
ways, they still shared the vices of the
known world, namely a love of gold and
silver which suffused their island.
Thus, it would not be long before Roman
traders sought to have dealings with
them.
Apparently, however, the first Roman
arrival was an accident. In his natural
history, Plenty reports that around 40
AD, in the reign of Claudius, a merchant
freedman by the name of Anus Plamus had
his vessel blown off course by a storm.
After 15 days, the winds deposited him
at the Moors of Hippuri. Here, he was
received by a king of the island who
hosted him for 6 months. In this time,
Plamus supposedly learned the language
and was able to share details of his
homeland.
This and the contents of his ship's
cargo convinced the king to send four
ambassadors to meet with Emperor
Claudius.
Thereafter, trade relations were
strengthened and more was learned of the
island.
In the center was a great lake from
which flowed two large rivers. The land
around them was well tilled and bore
much fruit. Taprobane was said to have
had 500 towns with the capital of Pale
Simundus being inhabited by 200,000
people.
individuals were of the typical
appearance for that part of the world,
but dressed like natives of Arabia and
lived to be over 100. During the
holidays, the population dedicated
themselves to hunting, especially tigers
and elephants. Fishing for tortoises was
also practiced, whose shells were so
large that they could cover the roofs of
houses.
Across the island, no slavery existed,
and the people had a strong sense of
justice. The king was elected by the
commoners and chosen for his mild and
clement disposition.
Should the sovereign bear a child, he
must abdicate to avoid the dangers of a
hereditary monarchy.
For his government, the leader was
advised by council of 30 members
provided by the people. These
individuals also acted as justices for
crimes of capital punishment. But if a
man were condemned, he could actually
appeal to a jury of his peers. If they
reversed the judgment, the council of 30
would fall into disgrace. Yet, even in
cases where the judgment was upheld, the
man committed to capital punishment was
still not slain, instead being
ostracized for life. Truly, this was a
strange and distant land, but not
necessarily one beyond Rome's reach.
Indeed, a prophecy apparently circulated
in the 3rd century that one day an
emperor would install a governor in
Taprobane.
But now we might ask, did the Romans and
their ambition venture even further
east?
Answering this question becomes more
difficult. One line of evidence we might
pursue would be the proliferation of
Roman coins and trade goods across
Southeast Asia. These can be found
scattered through the archaeological
record of Burma, Sumatra, Java, and
Vietnam.
Yet their mere presence tells us little
about who brought them there and why.
Some historians in the past have
interpreted these findings as
representing the high watermark in the
wave of western trade expansion.
However, more recent historians have
done much to shed light on the existence
of a vibrant trade network which already
existed in the region. If anything, it
was the maritime powers of India who in
this period had championed the waves of
the southern seas through their
economic, cultural and military
influence. We see this in the spread of
Indian traders, the missionary work of
Indian Hindus and Buddhists, and the
emergence of Indian petty states across
the aisles.
Yet, even with this correction in the
historical framing of the situation,
there are still some clues that a few
small Roman fish could be spotted
swimming amidst this great foreign sea.
Honchinese sources, for instance, speak
of da or Roman merchants being active in
both Vietnam and Cambodia.
Western interest in the region is
further backed up by Tomy's 2nd century
AD map which plots out the waters of
Magnus Sinus or the Gulf of Thailand and
which name drops the city of Katigara as
being located along this eastern most
shore. In 166 AD, Han sources even claim
to have received the first embassy from
the Roman Empire which arrived by boat
at the southern border. Unfortunately,
little is recorded of the group, leaving
some to speculate that these may have
just been merchants rather than official
diplomats.
But however we might speculate about the
travels of individuals, there was an
undeniably strong and vibrant global
river of trade flowing between Rome and
the Far East in these years. Over the
centuries, its strength would eb and
flow. In the 3rd century, for example,
Rome would be racked by civil war,
foreign invasion, and economic
disintegration. Yet at the same time as
this crisis, India would see its own
reversal in fortunes with the rise of
the powerful Gupta Empire. Later again,
as the Eastern Romans recovered, the
Guptas of the sixth century would be
laid low by step invasion. And finally,
in the 7th century, the rise of the
Arabs would prove most transformative as
it ushered in a new master of east west
trade.
But beneath the shadow of history's
grand swinging pendulum, the everyday
merchants could still be seen fleeting
back and forth across the world,
regardless of who was in charge.
Even long after the fall of Rome, coins
from this dead empire would find their
way into the storoom of a medieval
Japanese castle.
Thus, as we can imagine, the lasting
economic, cultural, and philosophical
exchange which resulted from all this
activity over the centuries is truly
fascinating.
But deep diving into that side of the
story shall have to be told another
time.
If you enjoy our work, consider
supporting us on Patreon to participate
in polls, catch script previews, and get
HD downloads of all our art.
We owe a huge debt to our current
patrons for funding the channel and to
our researchers, writers, and artists
for making this episode possible. We
certainly couldn't have done it without
this team and this community. So, be
sure to like and subscribe for more
content and check out these other
related episodes. See you in the next
one.